अथ वारिणि घोरतरं फणिनं
प्रतिवारयितुं कृतधीर्भगवन् ।
द्रुतमारिथ तीरगनीपतरुं
विषमारुतशोषितपर्णचयम् ॥१॥
अथ वारिणि	then in the water
घोरतरं फणिनं	very fierce that serpent
प्रतिवारयितुं	to drive away
कृतधी:	having decided
भगवन्	O Lord
द्रुतम्-आरिथ	quickly (Thou) approached
तीरग-नीप-तरुं	the bank situated Kadamba tree
विष-मारुत-शोषित-	the poisoned breeze had dried up
पर्ण-चयम्	the cluster of leaves
O Lord! Thou then made up Thy mind to drive away the fierce serpent from the waters. Thou quickly approached and got up on a Kadamba tree standing on the bank of the river, with its leaves withered due to the poisonous breeze.
अधिरुह्य पदाम्बुरुहेण च तं
नवपल्लवतुल्यमनोज्ञरुचा ।
ह्रदवारिणि दूरतरं न्यपत:
परिघूर्णितघोरतरङ्ग्गणे ॥२॥
अधिरुह्य	climbing with
पद-अम्बु-रुहेण	feet tender lotus like
च तं	and that (tree)
नव-पल्लव-तुल्य-	like tender new leaves
मनोज्ञ-रुचा	charming and splendorous
ह्रद-वारिणि	into the deep water
दूरतरं न्यपत:	far out (Thou) jumped
परिघूर्णित-	with swirling
घोर-तरङ्ग-गणे	fierce waves of water
Thou climbed that tree with Thy lotus like splendorous charming feet resembling tender leaves, and with a long leap jumped far out into the deep waters with swirling fierce waves.
भुवनत्रयभारभृतो भवतो
गुरुभारविकम्पिविजृम्भिजला ।
परिमज्जयति स्म धनुश्शतकं
तटिनी झटिति स्फुटघोषवती ॥३॥
भुवन-त्रय-भार-भृत:	of the three worlds the weight bearing
भवत: गुरु-भार-	of Thee the immense weight (causing)
विकम्पि-विजृम्भि-जला	swirling and swelling with its waters
परिमज्जयति स्म	started to submerge
धनु:-शतकं	the area of a hundred bows (in measurement)
तटिनी झटिति	on the river bed, and suddenly
स्फुट-घोषवती	(the river) made an intense roar
When, Thou the bearer of the weight of the three worlds, jumped, Thy immense weight caused the waters to swirl and swell. On the river bed an area of a hundred bows (yards) submerged, as a sudden roar arose from the river.
अथ दिक्षु विदिक्षु परिक्षुभित-
भ्रमितोदरवारिनिनादभरै: ।
उदकादुदगादुरगाधिपति-
स्त्वदुपान्तमशान्तरुषाऽन्धमना: ॥४॥
अथ दिक्षु विदिक्षु	then, in all the directions and the intermediary directions
परिक्षुभित-भ्रमित-	turbulent swirling
उदर-वारि-निनाद-भरै:	from the middle of the waters roaring aloud
उदकात्-उदगात्-	from (that) water came out
उरगाधिपति:-	the king of serpents
त्वत्-उपान्तम्-	near Thee
अशान्त-रुषा-	disturbed and angered
अन्धमना:	and so blinded (with rage)
The loud roar from the middle of the waters which extended to all the directions and the intermediary directions, disturbed and angered the serpent king Kaaliya. He came out of the water and rushed up to Thee in a fit of blinded anger.
फणशृङ्गसहस्रविनिस्सृमर-
ज्वलदग्निकणोग्रविषाम्बुधरम् ।
पुरत: फणिनं समलोकयथा
बहुशृङ्गिणमञ्जनशैलमिव ॥५॥
फण-शृङ्ग-	(with) hoods , peak (like)
सहस्र-विनि:सृमर-	thousands of them emitting
ज्वलत्-अग्नि-कण-	burning like fire flakes
उग्र-विष-अम्बुधरम्	fierce poison fluid bearing
पुरत: फणिनं	in front the serpent
समलोकयथा:	(Thou) saw
बहु-शृङ्गि-गणम्-	many peaked
अञ्जन-शैलम्-इव	black mountain, as if
Thou saw the serpent in front with his thousands of peak like hoods emitting burning fire flakes and fierce poison fluid, looking like a many peaked black mountain.
ज्वलदक्षि परिक्षरदुग्रविष-
श्वसनोष्मभर: स महाभुजग: ।
परिदश्य भवन्तमनन्तबलं
समवेष्टयदस्फुटचेष्टमहो ॥६॥
ज्वलत्-अक्षि	with flaming eyes
परिक्षरत्-उग्र-विष-	emitting deadly poison
श्वसन्-ऊष्मभर:	breathing out intense heat
स महाभुजग:	that huge serpent
परिदश्य	biting
भवन्तम्-अनन्तबलं	Thee of limitless strength
समवेष्टयत्-	coiled (around Thee)
अस्फुट-चेष्टम्-	making invisible Thy movements
अहो	Alas
Alas! That huge serpent emitting deadly poison and breathing out intense heat, bit Thee of limitless strength, all over Thy body. Then it coiled around Thee making Thy body and Thy movements invisible.
अविलोक्य भवन्तमथाकुलिते
तटगामिनि बालकधेनुगणे ।
व्रजगेहतलेऽप्यनिमित्तशतं
समुदीक्ष्य गता यमुनां पशुपा: ।।७॥
अविलोक्य भवन्तम्-	not seeing Thee
अथ-आकुलिते	then distressed
तट-गामिनि	(who) to the bank (of river Yamunaa) had come
बालक-धेनु-गणे	the children and the cows all
व्रज-गेह-तले-अपि-	in Gokula houses also
अनिमित्त-शतं	evil omens innumerable
समुदीक्ष्य गता	seeing went
यमुनां पशुपा:	towards Yamunaa the Gopas
The Gopa boys and the cows were distressed when they did not see Thee, and went to the bank of the river Yamunaa. In the houses in Gokula also the Gopas saw hundreds of evil omens and they also rushed towards Yamunaa.
अखिलेषु विभो भवदीय दशा-
मवलोक्य जिहासुषु जीवभरम् ।
फणिबन्धनमाशु विमुच्य जवा-
दुदगम्यत हासजुषा भवता ॥८॥
अखिलेषु	(as) all of them
विभो	O Lord
भवदीय-दशाम्	Thy plight
अवलोक्य	seeing
जिहासुषु	ready to give up their
जीवभरम्	lives
फणि-बन्धनम्-	the coils of the snake
आशु विमुच्य	quickly shedding
जवात्-उदगम्यत	hastily emerged
हासजुषा भवता	with a smile, Thou
O Lord! All of them were overwhelmed with grief on seeing Thy plight and were ready to give up their lives in order to save Thee. Just then, Thou quickly shed the coils of the snake and hastily emerged with a smile.
अधिरुह्य तत: फणिराजफणान्
ननृते भवता मृदुपादरुचा ।
कलशिञ्जितनूपुरमञ्जुमिल-
त्करकङ्कणसङ्कुलसङ्क्वणितम् ॥९॥
अधिरुह्य तत:	climbing upon then
फणि-राज-फणान्	the serpent king,s hoods
ननृते भवता	dance was performed by Thee
मृदु-पाद-रुचा	with delicate feet beautiful
कलशिञ्जित-नूपुर-	the gentle sound of the anklets
मञ्जु-मिलत्-	beautifully mingling with
कर-कङ्कण-सङ्कुल-	the bangles on the wrists'
सङ्क्वणितम्	tinkling
Then Thou mounted on the hoods of the serpent king and danced with Thy delicate beautiful feet. The gentle sound of the anklets mingled beautifully and rhythmically with the tinkling of the bangles on Thy wrists.
जहृषु: पशुपास्तुतुषुर्मुनयो
ववृषु: कुसुमानि सुरेन्द्रगणा: ।
त्वयि नृत्यति मारुतगेहपते
परिपाहि स मां त्वमदान्तगदात् ॥१०॥
जहृषु: पशुपा:-	rejoiced the Gopas
तुतुषु:-मुनय:	sang hymns the sages
ववृषु: कुसुमानि	showered flowers
सुरेन्द्र-गणा:	the gods' groups
त्वयि नृत्यति	when Thou danced
मारुतगेहपते	O Lord of Guruvaayur
परिपाहि	save
स	That (Thou)
मां	me
त्वम्-	Thou
अदान्त-गदात्	(from) severe illness
As Thou performed the dance, the Gopas rejoiced, the sages sang hymns, and the gods showered flowers. O Lord of the Guruvaayur temple! Such that Thou are, save me from the severe illness.